---
layout: post
title: Sins of the Father
subtitle: Spotlight film critique
---

*Spotlight (2015)* is a film based on actual events. Directed by Tom McCarthy, the film follows a special investigative team called ‘Spotlight’ working at the Boston Globe as they delve into a disturbing scandal that shakes up the Catholic Church as well as the entire city. The team probes into sexual harassment allegations against priests in the Boston Archdiocese and uncovers a decades-long cover up that sparks waves of revelations around the world.

*Spotlight* is engrossing from the start. The film’s first scene starts off at a police station with the film’s opening soundtrack, aptly named ‘Keep Silent’ is playing in the background. The dimly lit set, the tightly edited shots of the police officers and the victims combined with the soft background score, give us the feeling that there has been a cover-up. In another well-edited opening scene at the Globe offices, we are introduced to the *Spotlight* team as the camera cuts between the faces of each character as they’re working.

In addition to the editing, the cinematography in the film is exceptional, despite being extremely understated. The camera techniques draw the audience into the scene and are not at all intrusive. At the *Boston Globe* offices, the director uses over-the-shoulder shots during the official newsroom meetings to give a feel of intimacy and perspective from the characters’ point of view. Director of photography Masanobu Takayanagi uses medium and close-up shots to emphasize the facial expressions of the characters. This approach to cinematography combined with expressionistic lighting, brings out the best in the characters’ powerful performances. Another important visual decision in the film is the use of handheld photography. Compared to stable tripod shots of the *Globe* office, the shaky camera-work in the ‘Spotlight’ workspace give the feeling of comparative chaos deep within the bowels of the *Boston Globe*.

A scene where the reporters learn a shocking piece of news stands out. The reporters are all sitting around a speakerphone, listening to a source. The camera starts on the phone and then slowly pans whilst zooming out to reveal the characters around the room. This method gives the audience time to react to the disturbing news as well as see how the revelation has affected everyone else in the room. In another brilliant yet subtly realised sequence, the camera cuts between two of the reporter’s interviews with abuse victims. This crossing reveals two unique stories about two very different people, who are similar in just one way. The first is gay but his sexuality has nothing to do with the molestation and the second is enraged but his anger does not define him.

*Spotlight* has a deceptively simplistic visual style, which can be mistaken for the absence of one. As Anthony Scott from The New York Times comments “Visually, the movie is about as compelling as a day-old coffee stain. Almost perfect.” Since the film at its core is an investigation, it doesn’t come across as a newsroom drama, despite being set inside the offices of a newspaper. Spanning a time period of 2 years in investigation, *Spotlight* takes a patient and procedural approach to old-school journalism. Although the subject matter is heavy, the film is deliberately paced which never gives it the feeling of a thriller. Instead, McCarthy prefers to place more emphasis on story, character development and dialogue. Unlike the noir-esque film *All the President’s Men* or the thriller-like TV show *The Newsroom*, it does not have frequent dramatic spectacles, long monologues or long distance shots involving many characters at once. Instead, *Spotlight* uses conversation between characters to push the narrative forward.

All the performances by the ensemble cast are extremely well calibrated, with not a false note by anyone. As Michael Sragow from *FilmComment* puts it, “McCarthy fills his cast with players who are eloquent listeners.” In fact, the filmmakers have made sure that the characters are very subdued and have not been depicted as glamorous or heroic. The actors have done a great job in portraying their characters as patient, resolute people who take their job seriously. Pfeiffer, in particular, played by McAdams, reassures the victims that ‘Spotlight’ will get back to the case—especially after they’re assigned to cover the aftermath of 9/11. McAdams creates a sympathetic character, but one which mustn’t be mistaken for timid. In the movie’s shocking moment, a priest opens his door and confesses multiple acts of abuse to her. What’s even more disturbing is that he thinks he isn’t guilty since the acts did not give him any pleasure. Stanley Tucci is perfect as the irritable yet intense lawyer representing the victims. Liev Shreiber, who plays the new editor Marty Baron, an unmarried Jew from Florida, also delivers a powerful performance as a Boston outsider. Although his character can best be described as grandfatherly, it acts as the moral compass in the film and pushes the entire newspaper in the right direction by urging them to dig deeper into the child molestations. One of his dialogues near the end of the film summarizes what the film says about journalism: “You all have done some very good reporting here. If you need a moment, you’ve earned it. But I will need you all here Monday morning, ready to do your job.”

During an interview, screenwriter Josh Singer mentioned that the actors spent time with the people whose characters they’re playing in the film. I feel that their authentic Massachusetts accent as well as their effortless acting can be attributed to the involvement of their real-world counterparts. What I find truly brilliant is that despite the fact that characters of the news team are so underplayed, there is a lot of emotional flow in the film, which evokes intense emotions of anxiety, anger, shock and even distress as the story unfolds. This emotion in the viewer as well as the actors culminates in the closing credits scene, in which we are informed that there are more than 500 cities all over the world with cases of sexual abuse by the church.

*Spotlight* incorporates the perfect balance of diegetic and non-diegetic sound. The former is largely comprised of the sound of pen on paper, the ruffling of papers, and the typing noises on the computer. These sounds add a layer of authenticity to the film and transport the viewer into the ‘Spotlight’ office. The film’s background music, composed by the prolific Academy-award winner Howard Shore, is quietly haunting. At times, as the story is unraveling, you barely even notice the background score. However, in times of silence, such as when the victims are recounting their incidents, the dark piano-based score adds tension and suspense, but never distracts the audience away from the dialogue. At the end of the movie, when the articles are being printed and distributed, the soundtrack ‘The Story Breaks’ produces a sense of foreboding and sends a chill down the spine. The black and white quality of the piano flawlessly complements the visually plain newspaper industry. Shore’s score is beautiful on its own, but goes along with the movie perfectly as well. 

*Spotlight* is a tribute to the power of the press. The film catches *The Boston Globe* in transition. A large AOL billboard across the Globe office understates the fact that the print industry is dying due to burgeoning Internet. Due to its subtle aesthetic style, it is a film that resembles a newspaper. Its lack of a characteristic visual style echoes print media. The film offers us a keen insight into pen and paper journalism and why it needs to be revived. Although currently, newspapers are in a tight spot financially, this film shows us why print media serves a crucial role in our society of shining a spotlight on the issues that matter.

The film is also a big-picture take on the ignorance of a city as modern and well developed as Boston. Aerial shots of the *Globe* office, the Boston skyline as well as parts of the city have been used to transition between takes. Another important feature of this movie are shots of the characters in locations that are central to Boston culture such as Fenway Park, Old North Church and the Boston Public Gardens. This underlines the fact that the scandal involves the city’s large establishments and gives the effect that this story is not just about a few victims, but about the entire metropolitan. Although we cannot point a finger directly at one person, Marty perfectly summarizes the situation with one dialogue, “Sometimes it’s easy to forget that we spend most of the time stumbling around in the dark. Suddenly, a light gets turned on and there’s a fair share of blame to go around.”

*Spotlight* is a masterpiece. It incorporates the perfect blend of emotion and calm, easily making it one of the best films of the year. Needless, to say, this landmark film joins *All the President’s Men* in the cult of great journalism movies. However, unlike other films in this specialized genre, *Spotlight* is by no means a dramatic movie. As Alex Dowd from the *AV-Club* describes it, “*Spotlight* is that rare breed of newspaper drama which shows admiration for the profession.” It is a slow burn, but one which ends in an explosion. In the end, *Spotlight* not just breaks the story, but breaks the silence.